You talked about sort of the scenes in
Minnesota [music] and you talked about
people blowing whistles, running around
warning businesses that ICE is coming.
Right. Because I mean, you know, all
what [music] we have are whistles, they
have guns, right?
What do the protests against ICE really
look like on [music] the ground?
Just how dangerous are the interactions
between protesters and ICE agents?
[screaming]
>> Agents deployed chemical irritants and
at one point an agent used a taser
before taunting the crowd.
>> And are there any forms of immigration
[music] enforcement that protesters and
activists could accept?
The death of Renee Good in Minneapolis
[music] has put a spotlight on the
aggressive tactics used by ICE agents
doing immigration enforcement in
American cities
and also on the groups training ordinary
people to follow and film ICE agents
when they're making arrests.
>> Witnesses captured [music]
video,
>> many cameras on the street that captured
Renee Good's fatal encounter. My guest
today is doing just [music] that kind of
training. He's the executive director of
a Minneapolis nonprofit that's on the
front lines of [music] the current wave
of anti-ICE activism.
Francisco Siggoia, welcome to
Interesting Times. [music]
>> Thank you. Thank you for having me here.
>> So, we're going to talk about what it
means to train people to protest. We're
going to talk about the goals, the
larger goals of the anti-ICE protests.
But I just want to start by getting
something immediate from you about the
situation in Minneapolis. We're taping
this on Wednesday. It's about a week out
from when Renee Good was shot and
killed. Can you just describe what you
see as the current dynamic on the
ground, both with ICE agents and with
protesters?
>> It is a a scary moment for thousands of
families in Minnesota.
Um we see ICE agents all over the city
driving their cars
um stopping people
and we see people chasing them as well.
People whistling, alerting others that
ICE is present. Um a lot of videos of
eyes arresting people and uh people
crying, windows, cars, windows being
broken. So it is like I will say being
in a in a maybe in the middle of a civil
war where people are running. Uh
yesterday for instance right outside my
office we saw a woman running. I think
she was uh telling businesses to close
doors because eyes was around and we all
from the office ran out, put their vest
um to see what was happening and right
immediately I eyes came to the corner uh
stopped a vehicle and arrested two
people. That's what we are going through
right now.
>> How many people do you think are
involved in the different kinds of
protests? Uh it depends if there is a a
march uh hundreds or thousands of people
will show up. But when there is an ICE
action
uh what we have noticed that for
instance yesterday
um a lot of people get out of their
houses get into the street uh and become
present
um and to begin chanting uh things like
shame and I mean and in just a matter of
minutes you can see 30 50 100 people
coming to uh witness and chant and and
and saying various things to ICE agents.
>> So what what is COPAL? Tell me what what
does the organization do in normal
normal times?
>> Yes. Uh Copal is stand for communities
organizing power and action for Latinos.
Um we came about in 2018 and what we did
or what we created organization was to
better the quality of lives of Latino
families in Minnesota. But then right
after we began COVID came in and uh so
that it was then when we created the
helpline that we we have now. Uh so
supporting families across the state to
uh keep healthy but our main mission is
to better our communities uh through a
range of activities that we do. One of
them is a worker center. We have a
worker center where people come to look
for jobs, careers uh youth and adults.
Um we also support people who have been
victims of wage theft which is pretty
common in um some industries and and we
have offices as well that we have opened
in two other cities Rochester and Mano.
>> And what about what about immigration
work prior again prior to prior to the
current protests? Obviously there was
immigration enforcement in Minneapolis
before the current wave, right? like if
somebody called your helpline
um having you know having been taken
into custody by ICE four years ago would
you have done something?
>> Yeah, the most that we could have done
is to refer that person to a lawyer. Uh
so we we didn't have obviously the level
of u ICE activity that we have now but
uh most of our work would have been uh
someone was arrested what do we do?
Okay, let's uh connect that family or
that person with a lawyer and the lawyer
will take it from there. That's how how
much we did.
>> Okay. Give me just a little bit of your
own biography. Um you're from El
Salvador originally. Tell me your story
of coming to the United States.
>> So my country was going through a civil
war. I am a teacher by trade. And um so
in 1990 there was a major actually ' 89
there was a major military offensive
that and some of the some priests were
killed by the army and so the situation
was unbearable and um and I couldn't be
in El Salvador anymore because of many
uh people teachers uh remain being a
target of the government. So uh then uh
with my ex-wife uh who was expecting uh
she was she was 6 months pregnant uh we
had to migrate. I looked for the a
Canadian embassy in El Salvador, looked
for uh political asylum, but there was
no Canadian embassy. And then uh the
only idea uh some relatives says why
don't you come to the United States. I
hesitated a little bit about coming to
the United States because understanding
the role of the United States in El
Salvador. But eventually we couldn't
didn't have any other options. So we did
uh and like many millions of people and
many Salvadorans in the 80s I traveled
uh north uh without documents. So uh
crossed three borders and the last one
uh United States without documents.
>> How did you cross the US the US border
specifically at that point? Yeah,
[clears throat] at that point uh in the
'90s uh uh Tijuana and
uh was they were building the the uh uh
the wall. There was no fence. There was
no fence at that moment. I do remember
that basically we went to the border and
uh from there we just cross and I mean
there were hundreds of people trying to
cross and the agents were chasing many
people. There were so many people uh
trying to cross and that's what happened
to us. But you just sort of carefully
walked straight forwardly across.
>> Right. Right. So we went to Florida
where our family uh live and eventually
uh another friend who used to live in
Minnesota uh skateboarding you come to
Minnesota. Um and that's how we ended up
in Minnesota. It was a two-month old
baby. And um there there were some nuns
that offer us shelter uh at that moment
to know didn't speak English, didn't
have documents, fearful of a lot of
things. Um and and Minnesota became
home.
>> And so what happened then in terms of
your legal status?
I eventually I was able to get legal uh
representation and so I had to leave the
country, go back to El Salvador to get
the the visa and entry back again. So it
was in 1990 when I was already with a
green card. How would you say just as
obviously someone who works on these
issues,
you know, it's now been 1990. Sorry, I'm
going to do the math in my head. It's
been 35 35
>> 35 years. 35 35 years. Um
>> yes.
>> So there's been probably infinite
changes in the immigrant legal
experience. But like what what are the
biggest what are the biggest changes
that you've observed between then and
now?
You know when I came I heard for
instance that the Rian administration
has given uh amnesty
>> right
>> to a lot of people and
and uh historically there has been
always uh hostility toward immigrants if
you you know Mexicans already had been
deported um in massive numbers before
right but uh there are some at least
when I came there was a different
perspective I think wars in Central
America. Even the Republicans had a
different perspective. Uh you have
people like George Bush and others with
different perspective of immigrants than
what we have now. Um so
what what I see is that we see more
waves of immigrants from Africa for
instance, from Latin America. And so and
in Minnesota when I came in 1990 there
hardly was anyone that spoke Spanish. So
so so I you know over these many years I
have seen the how the community have
grown and the Latino business community
has grown the the uh here so which is
something good.
>> And had you ever been involved in any
kind of direct protests on immigration
before the second Trump administration
before the last year? So immigration is
something that I I I mean human rights,
civil rights is something that always
has been. I am a teacher as I said
before and as a person who kept grown in
a country where uh government was so
abusive your level of consciousness is
awaken. Uh and also thinking that as
people we deserve a good life. Uh
probably one of the most uh relevant
moments has been uh I think it was after
the 911 where immigrants began seeing as
the enemies and here in Minnesota they
removed the access to driver licenses.
Personally wasn't impacted because I
already was a a US citizen. Uh I became
citizen in 1998.
Um and so but I saw a lot of people that
were impacted and also I noticed it how
uh immigrants became the scapegoat for a
lot of other issues that were impacting
the society and and that's you know as a
person who I am the first generation
immigrants you feel like no we're not um
and and so so that has been for that
many 20 years uh trying to restore the
access to driver licenses was
>> that was the main political cause. Okay.
Yeah. So, what what happened after after
the last election? What has it meant to
turn your organization into a group that
is active in helping people who want to
protest?
>> Yeah. In 20 in 2024 when we saw the
results of the elections and we
obviously knew the promises that were
made by back then candidate Trump,
>> right? Promises. promises to do mass
deportations.
>> Correct. We began the process of
thinking um can we create something that
will allows us to teach people about
their rights and it's not that we are
teaching people to protest
uh although uh protesting peacefully
protesting is is is a right that we all
have but it it was about how do we teach
people their rights? how do we ask
people who are not impacted by
immigrations issues to participate? So
that was the core of this uh work that
we do and so eventually we created the
immigrant defense network understanding
that uh we had to work on issues of
narratives what the dominant narratives
think about immigrants. What is it that
we need to do to keep uh creating a
counternarrative that we are not the
problem but we are part of the solutions
that that society faces.
How do we train our people so they
utilize their rights and so so that was
the core of what we have been doing. So
protesting is not the vehicle. The the
way that we frame it is like know your
rights and use them to uh do what uh the
constitutions allows you to do.
>> And do you use the term constitutional
observer? This is okay. So what what is
a constitutional observer?
>> So basically under the constitution of
the United States uh we all have rights.
Now obviously the rights for people
without documents are are are more
limited. they still have we still have
rights to due process and representation
and all the things and so the
constitutional observer became a tool
for people who uh who wanted to document
the actions of ICE and though by
documenting that not interfering with
the uh obstructing uh an eyes action but
documenting uh was a tool that we have
been using and and relate that that
information to either lawyers or anyone
else who can follow up on behalf of the
person that has been arrested.
>> So, so let's say let's say I
>> I call you up or I come I come to your
offices and I say I'm concerned about
ISIS presence in Minneapolis. I want to
become a constitutional observer or I
want to be trained in how to sort of be
present at ICE actions. just give me
give me a precy of what kind of what
kind of training or instructions you
would give.
>> So first I will thank you for uh
expressing your interest and then I will
uh suggest that to show up to the next
training that we have and so it is a 90
minutes training where you go through uh
various presentations. One is what is a
constitutional observer? uh what is it
that we do and don't do. Uh the
importance of documenting when eyes ask
you to step back uh step back do not
obstruct. When eyes tell you to uh to
turn your camera off, you don't have to
obey that because it's your right to uh
video record what your government is
doing. Um do not
uh do not point to the face of the
person who is being arrested. pay
attention to details like the
uh actions of eyes, the which division
of the DHS are they representing, the
process and the procedures in which they
uh do their work and so and then once
the
uh raid has happened uh submit that
information to uh our network the uh
immigrant defense network. And so with
all the documentation that you did and
then the next step is to support the
family that was impacted. Uh sometimes
there are children, sometimes there are
other vulnerable people and support them
and um uh and that's where the support
system kicks in. Uh and sometimes we
help people with uh paying their rent.
Uh especially if the person who was
arrested is the one who you know
provides the food. uh and and if uh if
there are is a lawyer needed although
the situation with lawyer is pretty
difficult right now because many lawyers
are busy many lawyers who provide this
for free are busy
>> what let's go back to something you said
at the very start you talked about sort
of the scenes in Minnesota and you
talked about people blowing whistles
running around warning businesses that I
is coming is that part of the training
is that something that you tell people
to do or urge people to do
Actually we don't uh we don't but we
provide whistles and we provide test and
uh we have a booklet that is the
constitutional observer booklet um you
can find that online and our website
>> and um and so we provide copies of those
books and um so that's part of the
training. The whistle is part of that.
Uh uh for instance, if you as a citizen
observe the presence of eyes in your
neighborhood, you can call the helpline
and said, "I have witnessed this." That
information come to us. We assess the
fact and then we activate constitutional
observers. So if you become a an
constitutional observer, we may say uh
Rose, there is a eyes presence in your
neighborhood. Will you show up to uh do
your constitutional observer duty?
Right?
>> And and so that's how we activate you.
>> And so then but then the expect if
you're giving me a whistle, right, the
expectation is I will be out. I will be
documenting in some way with a camera,
but I will also be doing things to alert
the neighborhood, right? that that or
that that's that's you you don't you
don't insist on it but it's clearly part
of what people are doing
>> right because you most people are using
I mean you know all what we have are
whistles they have guns right
>> yes and they do have guns and we'll I
want to [laughter] I want to talk I want
to talk about what that [clears throat]
what that what that has meant in a
minute but just on so on and at the end
of one of these
>> incidents or observation periods um
someone comes to you, right? They come
back to you and they deliver the
documentation. Um they and in most cases
now it's going to be video.
>> Are you guys responsible then for what I
think is one of the most important
features of the process which is clips
getting edited, cut up and put on the
internet? Like are you sort of are you
guys doing that? Are you guys doing
curation? who so what what is the
transmission of the clips from
>> documentation to
to social media which is where they've
been huge
>> we we don't we don't do that uh uh we
work closely with uh ACLU
>> okay
>> um and if the family we have a we had a
family for instance whose dad was taken
and so the we asked the lawyer of the
family um if they want access to those
documents. We don't make any changes. We
don't uh because what we want is to have
factual information and that's what we
give to either the lawyer or ACLU or any
institution that may follow up on the
case. Um and and and so we don't we
don't go online and post anything. Um
>> Okay. Let's talk then about risks about
the guns, right?
>> Yes. Um what do you when you when you
give when you give me when you give a
hypothetical person a training how much
time do you spend telling them what not
to do? I mean the whole training is 90
minutes. For instance yesterday I went
to do a training there were about 300 uh
mostly teachers on the training and so
the situation I believe is that many of
us are driven by a lot of emotions. when
we see someone taking and sometimes
abuse in front of our our eyes and what
do we do? So it is essential for us to
keep oursel together. So so yesterday
there was a gentleman who um was
uh was there and and then I came close
to the car. I don't know exactly what
happened there, but uh ICE agents came
out and arrested him. Uh he
was not affected because I'm assuming
that was just a citizen tired of what
they what he's seeing,
>> but he did something he did something
physical.
>> He did something that I I that I
>> you would not advise people to do.
>> Exactly. And and that's why it is key
for us to say your job is to observe not
to obstruct uh keep distance from the
agent and um and just documents and
again we are not there to condemn what
people does or doesn't do. You just were
there to observe and that's what we ask
uh the people who comes to our training
used to be an observer.
>> Can we just talk for a minute about the
specifics of Renee Good?
>> Yes. Uh, I'm very confident that you
think the shooting was unjustified and
wrong. I'm curious what as someone who
trains activists, trains people for
observation at least,
you see when you watch the video and
watch what she was doing and what her
partner was doing. Cuz to me, just
watching it, it just seems like there's
a sense that neither of them had a clear
sense of the gravity of the situation
that they were in. I don't I don't think
that based on what I've seen, she was
trying to run over the ICE officer. I do
think she was trying to drive away, peel
away from law enforcement. And there's
this moment where her partner is telling
her, "Drive, drive." And all I can think
watching it is someone should have told
her that this is a very serious
situation. You're dealing with armed
officers of the state involved in some
kind of ongoing operation and you want
to behave as if it is a dangerous
situation. So, I'm curious what your
reaction is to what you what you saw in
those videos.
Yeah, I think u um as a principle
as a principle I don't think no one
should kill another person and and I
believe that law enforcement has to
maybe has to use it in extreme cases but
pull out your gun and just kill someone
because because you are the law
enforcement. I don't think a civil
society should tolerate that. Um and so
that was a principle right? Yeah,
>> guns shouldn't be used, you know,
because you have a green uniform. Uh, so
that's the principle. But, but then when
you look at the video, you know, one
thing is and reinforcing the idea that
a video is so essential because allows
us to see uh a lot of things that
otherwise we wouldn't have seen.
Now,
uh let's keep in mind that that street
is a one-way street. Um and and
[clears throat] many of us were
wondering was she uh Renee being a
observer? Was uh Renee
some from that community who was
[snorts]
doing something else. So there are still
so many unknowns
>> to us uh that it's hard to say anything
else. What I saw on the video is someone
leaving. You can see the tires turning
to the right
and
the officer
was I don't know if it was touched. I I
don't see that. Uh but obviously that
the officer pull out the the gun and
shoot a uh to a a very short distance.
Um and and so so that's what we see uh
and everyone sees it. We know that the
administration immediately
said that the officer was injured and
taken to the hospital which many other
videos show that he just basically was
walking. And so again,
>> right, I guess I'm I'm just curious
about as as someone who trains
protesters, right?
>> We I you know, we don't we don't know
for certain exactly the details um of
what she was trying to do or what her
partner was trying to do, but they did
seem to be acting. You know, they're
interacting with the officers, they're
filming them and so on, right? And I'm
just wondering how you when you talk to
people in the aftermath of something
like that, like how focused are you on
making sure that protesters
>> behave with caution?
>> Yes. So in my training yesterday, I as I
was talking to people, I said, "Listen,
if you have this vest that it says
immigrant defense network and uh
somebody else show up with the same
vest, coordinate with that person, keep
an eye on that person." Um, and if
someone is in a place like behind an ICE
car, make sure that the person is not
behind a vehicle. Uh, make sure to keep,
uh, in our booklet, we suggest to keep a
fit away from the agent. Um, and keep
yourself safe. So,
>> so don't so right using so using cars
for protests is a bad idea.
>> Yeah. Yeah. I yeah that that's that
wouldn't I mean again the scenario was
so unique I think in a way that my uh
our assumption and guidance is you walk
into the place you use your phone you
document
>> and keep yourself safe those are some of
the things and in spite of that we have
several uh legal observers have been
impacted by in following all those
procedures so we said this is a risky
yeah
>> thing that you're doing Uh so do it as
your own at your own risk and comfort.
Um and and you know not everyone that is
trained is willing to do it so it's fine
too.
>> Are there any other groups out there
that are doing this kind of things that
you're worried about? I I asked this
because again these things are
uncertain, but one of the claims was
that Renee Good had been involved um
with a group called Icew Watch and if
you go online you can find images from
their alleged training that are very
different from your own, right? That
are, you know, sort of encouraging
people potentially to intervene when
they see, you know, when they see
arrests being made and so on. Like do
you have a sense that there's kind of a
range of different activist strategies?
Are those groups outliers? What do you
think is going on?
>> I believe that in the landscape you will
find many many different people uh doing
many different things and and is you
know it is to the own discretion of the
group that calls that or provides a
trading and is up to the discretion of
the people who decides to participate. I
don't have um a number. I I don't know.
I have seen a lot of different groups
doing different things
>> and that's what the landscape is.
>> I want to ask more just about specific
ICE tactics, but just a last just just
to underline that last point. You don't
have any control over ICE, but you are
in a position of training and some kind
of leadership, right? Like what what do
you do to make sure that protesters
protest safely and don't make bad
decisions? Like how much influence can
you have? Do you think?
>> I I think uh uh you know I don't know
how much influence I have but that is
hard to know. I know that we have a lot
of emotions and again last night in my
presentation to this group of people I
said listen I understand we have a lot
of emotions
but we had to work on keeping our
emotions together
>> y
>> because our emotions are not going to be
useful and if we make a mistake um and
then the consequences can be greater. So
we keep relying on the use of the legal
means that we have and so we encourage
you to keep doing that as well. Uh
that's how much uh we can say um because
at the end of the day we don't want
another death to happen. Agreed.
[snorts]
All right, let's let's segue from there
a little bit just into larger political
and legal questions.
I'm curious in terms of and I know I
know you don't we're not calling them
protests, we're calling them
observation, right? But they have they
clearly the work you're doing clearly
has the function of a kind of political
protest against this kind of immigration
enforcement.
I want to try and sort of separate sort
of different things that ICE is doing.
Like how much of the backlash, the
community fear, all of this is based
around the kind of paramilitary
presentation of ICE, the fact that
they're masked, the fact that they are
dressed in what looks more like military
gear than than police gear. Like if I
were doing the same general kinds of
things, going into neighborhoods,
looking for people, but was presenting
as normal police, would that create a
different environment in Minneapolis, do
you think?
>> I I believe that uh I mean, immigration
has been detaining people for long. So
this is this is not new. They go after
people. They detain the person.
But the what we see now is a whole show
that is this show that we have
uh the head of DHS coming to town with
cameras and rifles and going after
communities after people. So it's a
whole show and the show is pretty risky
because it's dehumanizing to begin with
but also um it doesn't look to create a
safer community. So enforcement has been
happening all the time. But also think
about for instance the president of
United States called the Somali
community garbage. The Somali community
in Minnesota is it's a pretty large it's
is it's a it's a very large diaspora. So
right after he said they are garbage
then you can you see a bunch of agents
coming into town to go to Somalic
businesses.
So it seems that it's mostly a political
show to
>> but that's this is I mean that was also
I agree it was a political move but it
was also I think a specific reaction to
stories about fraud related to the
Somali community right that that was
sort of that was what made Minneapolis a
target and the president's rhetoric is
sort of downstream of those issues
>> fraud that is not only done by a segment
of of the Somali community.
So, so that's part of the game, right?
Because you know the person for instance
who was the mastermind of the $250
million
was not a Somali person.
Uh and so so
>> this feeding our futures scandal just
just so listeners listeners are aware.
>> Yeah. Uh, I mean, I guess what I'm
trying to get at a little bit here is
the country is having a debate about
immigration enforcement, and I'm trying
to figure out how much of the debate is
about tactics and the show and the
rifles, and how much of it is about just
the legitimacy of enforcement itself,
right? Because if you talk to a
spokesman for the administration, an
advocate for these things, they say they
would say, "Look, you know, the primary
goal of what we're doing is deporting
people who have criminal records.
Liberal cities and liberal states have
not cooperated with the federal
government. And from their point of
view, essentially, they're doing
legitimate law enforcement work. and
they're being followed by people with
whistles who are filming them, which you
would not presumably do for any other,
you know, if if you had federal
government doing drug raids, even if you
thought there were problems with drug
laws, you wouldn't urge people to go to
follow them with whistles, right? I
guess I'm asking simple question. What
kind of immigration enforcement is
legitimate in your view?
>> That's that's a good question. Um,
that's a good question. It's a pretty
tricky question. I I let's not be naive
that the administration has an agenda
and has an anti-immigrant agenda
and obviously it's going to use all the
institutions under his power to execute
his agenda to demonstrate to whoever he
promised that was going to uh fulfill
that promise. So now like I said before
this is not the first time that ICE
immigration enforcements arrest people.
Uh they it has been happening all the
time. What we are seeing right now is
uh heavily armed individuals, masked as
you said, going to places and stopping
people based on their appearance
and no civil society should allow that
assuming that because you are a brownkin
you are undocumented.
Oh, or but there are documented cases of
going into a Target store arresting two
US citizens. I I think it's actually
just to pause there because I think it's
it's a good case study in how in some of
this stuff you can find video online of
the beginning of that arrest and those
it's actually a case study in what one
of the guys the US citizens is filming
an ICE agent as they enter Target. I'm
not sure for exactly what purpose. And
then they have a kind of altercation in
the doorway that people have been
arguing about online, like who started
the altercation, right? And then both of
the men are arrested. They're not
arrested, as far as I can tell, for not
being US citizens. They're arrested for
the altercation and then and then
released. But so it's just an example of
like again it's a kind of roarshock test
of whether you think the person
observing the agent went too far or
whether you think the agent went too
far. Maybe they both went too far. Um
but I just wanted to to stipulate that.
I guess I'm interested in stabilization.
>> Yes. And I say this as someone who I
think has a pretty strong understanding
of why voters became especially
concerned about immigration under the
Biden presidency where you had an
unprecedented level of what I would call
illegal and you would call undocumented
immigration into the United States. But
then I too recoil from some of the ICE
behavior that I see in the videos. I
think it's it I think walking around
with masks in an American city um the
way they're doing is unamerican in some
way and I'm just trying to figure out if
there's a balance that can be struck if
there is a form a form of enforcement
basically
uh that is
essentially livable for people in the
immigrant community uh that also
satisfies people who are concerned that
you know the US has essentially
essentially opened its borders under
under the Biden presidency and something
had to be done about that.
That's a statement, not a question. But
tell just just just tell me if you're
talking to someone and you must know
people who are skeptical of illegal
immigration, who you know don't hate
Latinos or Hispanics, but thought the
Biden policy was a failure. [gasps]
What do you say to people who, you know,
who voted for Donald Trump and want a
secure border and expect some kind of
enforcement? Number one, I will say to
everyone, including you, know your
history.
Know the history of the United States.
understand
the role of the United States around the
world, but particularly in Latin America
and how the US policy in Latin America
has been play the role of being a
destabilizing force that provokes
migration. If he United States has a
pretty good memory, they wouldn't repeat
the same thing that they do often times.
But
we don't teach enough or good history.
We don't teach how for instance just
just a recent example the situation in
Venezuela. The Venezuelans regardless of
Maduro being a good or bad person but
Venezuela was going through some
challenges. The United States
participated in creating more chaos in
Venezuela. Thousands of Venezuelans left
home to different places including the
United States.
Venezuelans came to the border.
They were put in places to process them.
My understanding is that the United
States like many other societies, first
world countries as they call, they have
this process where you can ask for
political asylum.
So they some of them were of some of
many were allowed to get into the United
States. So the issues of Latin America
the council migration of Latin Americas
has also a level of connection between
the US policy. I wouldn't say 100% US is
responsible because we have local
governments in our countries that are
very responsible as well. But there is a
link between those two factors. So all
these things creates instability
and instability creates m uh migrations
and also that receiving economy needs
people. And so we have an a broken
immigration system that needs people
that needs their labor but don't want to
see people. People wants to eat their
tacos but don't want to see the ones who
put them together. people wants to see
their houses clean or hotels clean but
don't want to see the labor that
produces that. So that's I think is
something that the United States people
needs to understand that you cannot have
the labor without the person. This is
last question then off that though is
there is there any limiting principle on
that view is there any place where it's
reasonable for someone who disagrees
with you politically to be able to say
here is a just way for the US to limit
immigration.
>> I believe so. I I believe so. And and
and and I don't think no one speaks
about open borders. I I I I don't think
uh I mean at least the people that I
understand and myself wouldn't say no
>> no one no one wants to use the term open
borders I agree but what I see from
activists is a sense people will say I'm
not for open borders but it then is very
hard for them to define a limit on any
form of sympathetic migration so is
there any is there a just limit that you
could set
>> you know I I I believe that for instance
let's say I'm from El Salvador uh my
country was going through political
reasons situations in that moment. So
the idea that I can show up to uh an
embassy and say hey I feel prosecuted
can what can I do can you help me that
is the vehicle right that many uh uh
opportunities uh can open up for
situations like that but let's say there
is a the situation is economics wouldn't
be better for the United States to have
a visa program that would allow workers
to come
safer and legally to the United hates
and work and produce and participate
that I think can be a one way uh the
other reality and believe me the
Democrats or Republicans are equally
responsible for not fixing this issue.
For long we have been fighting for an
immigration reform understanding that
there are a lot of people here that are
already absorbed by the economy. So the
economy needs it. Why don't we fix that
issue? And then uh uh fixing that issue
if there are still workers needed, why
don't we have a visa program that allows
uh companies to hire people and they
have obviously rights because you know
uh people has to have human rights. So
so that can be a perspective but there
is not the political will to solve that
>> right. There's also though the question
of again where the limits come in
because if you are an American company,
there will always be some incentives to
hire people from poorer countries
because they will for totally
understandable reasons work for lower
wages. So I think I think there is still
this question of from a kind of
pro-immigrant perspective how you set
limits. Are there things do you think
it's legitimate to deport immigrants who
commit crimes, which is again the core
justification that ICE is offering?
That's not obviously the only thing
they're doing. But when when ICE says
we're deporting this person who had a
drunk driving infraction, do you think
that's a legitimate function of
government?
>> I believe that the crime
has
I mean there are very different levels
of crimes, right?
And I and I believe that uh people
I mean obviously that that we I I don't
want to say oh no don't deport someone
who has committed a crime. That's
let's define crime within the theme of
what is a criminal offense that deserves
a deportation. So I wouldn't uh defense
a person. I I mean someone committed a
murder or any anything like that. Many
of us wouldn't be like, "Oh, yeah, let's
defend this person." No, that wouldn't
be the case.
>> The question is the gravity of the
crime.
>> Exactly. So, because you know, I mean,
uh, some people can um, I mean, I I I
wouldn't encourage anyone to drive and
being drunk. That's not an smart
decision. Did this person get into an
accident? No one got killed, for
instance, and and is in an accident.
Would that be a reason to be deported?
Those are some of the things that I
think is key for a civil society
to be able to put that in a better pers
different perspective.
>> Yeah. Well, that's obviously something
that we're going to continue having a
political debate about for some time to
come. I just want to say before I let
you go that I sincerely wish you good
luck in keeping people on the streets of
Minnesota safe. And Francisco Siggoia,
thank you so much for joining me. Thank
you so much for the opportunity to speak
with you and your [music] audience.